arXiv:1104.3421v3 [cs.CC] 23 Jun 2011

Empirical Encounters with Computational
Irreducibility and Unpredictability
Hector Zenil
Department of Computer Science
University of Sheffield and
IHPST, Université de Paris 1
Fernando Soler-Toscano
Grupo de Lógica, Lenguaje e Información
Departamento de Filosofı́a, Lógica, y Filosofı́a de la Ciencia
Universidad de Sevilla
Joost J. Joosten
Departament de Lògica, Història i Filosofia de la Ciència
Universitat de Barcelona
Abstract
This paper is an exploration of the conceptual issues that have arisen
in the course of investigating speed-up and slowdown phenomena in
small Turing machines. We present the results of a test that may spur
experimental approaches to the notion of computational irreducibility.
The test involves a systematic attempt to outrun the computation of a
large number of small Turing machines (all 3 and 4 state, 2 symbol) by
means of integer sequence prediction using a specialized function finder
program. This massive experiment prompts an investigation into rates of
convergence of decision procedures and the decidability of sets in addition
to a discussion of the (un)predictability of deterministic computing
systems in practice. We think this investigation constitutes a novel
approach to the discussion of an epistemological question in the context
of a computer simulation, and thus represents an interesting exploration
at the boundary between philosophical concerns and computational
experiments.
Keywords: Computational irreducibility; unpredictability; problem
of induction; algorithmic epistemology; halting problem. 2010 Mathematics Subject Classification: 68Q01, 68Q17, 68Q15

1

1

Introduction

For more than half a century mathematicians and computer scientists have
known that final victory is impossible in the struggle to attain ultimate predictability. Even for deterministic systems we have accepted that there are
truths and facts about these systems which will remain unproven, as shown by
Kurt Gödel and Alan Turing for formal axiom systems and computing machines.
This doesn’t mean that we have to give up on gaining new insights through the
study of predictability and unpredictability in deterministic systems.
More and more powerful computing machines made possible tasks that has
hitherto seemed impossible, and it wasn’t long after Gödel and Turing’s work
when people started asking how much time a task would take if performed with
one rather than another algorithm. The need for a notion of complexity became
clear. Although not formally spelled out, in a letter written to von Neumann
(Princeton, March 20, 1956), Gödel himself had already proposed a first version
of the P=NP? problem in terms of finite problems of quadratic time (the letter
came to light in 1988). Efficiency became a guiding principle in the design of
algorithms, but the idea of designing an algorithm capable of producing optimal
algorithms was found to be equivalent to the halting problem. For if there were
a way to find such an algorithm, Gödel and Turing’s unsolvable and undecidable problems would be solved. Therefore one has no choice but to exchange
idealistic goals for realistic approximations. In this paper we present an experimental approach for dealing with the notion of computational irreducibility as
connected to the problem of empirical unpredictability. We think our approach
is a novel one, in which we bring to a formal framework (a computer experiment) a notion we believe is largely epistemological in nature (computational
irreducibility).

2

Predicting the behavior of deterministic computing systems

Will looking at the behavior of a system for certain times and in certain cases tell
you anything about the behavior of the system at a later time and in the general
case? For example, the phase transition measure presented in [19] implies that
one may, within limits, be able to predict the overall behavior of a system
from a segment of initial inputs based on the prior variability of said system.
Experience tells us we would do well to predict future behavior on the basis of
prior behavior (a Bayesian hypothesis), yet we know this is impossible in the
general case due to the halting problem.
This is also related to Israeli and Goldenfeld’s [8] findings. They showed
that some computationally irreducible Elementary Cellular Automata (ECA)
have properties that are predictable at certain coarse-grained levels. They did
so by employing a renormalization group technique, a mathematical apparatus
that allows one to investigate the changes in a physical system as one views
it at different distance scales. They sought ways to replace several cells of
2

an automaton with a single cell. However, their prediction capabilities too are
bedeviled by the unavoidable (and ultimately undecidable) induction problem of
whether one can keep on predicting for all initial conditions and for any number
of steps, without having to run the system for all possible initial conditions and
for an arbitrary number of steps.
The question is, then, under what circumstances this kind of large-scale
prediction is possible. For ECA Rule 30 in Wolfram’s CA enumeration [18],
for example, this large-scale approach doesn’t seem to say very much. In many
cases, it may at most predict a few steps ahead, meaning that while the behavior
of the system is not completely chaotic, it is unpredictable, in the sense that one
cannot in general predict an arbitrary number of steps ahead without having
to run the entire computation step-by-step. For many systems, including the
most random-looking ones, overall behavior cannot be expected to change much.
One of the main features of systems in Wolfram’s class 4 [17] is precisely the
existence of pervasive structures that one can predict up to a certain point.
What is surprising is that in all these fully deterministic and extremely simple
systems, such as ECA, not every aspect of their evolution is trivially predictable,
not because of a problem of measurement or hypersensitivity, but because we
don’t know whether there are any shortcuts—whether they exist or how to
systematically find them. And some of these questions are reducible to the
halting problem.

Figure 1: In this simulation of ECA Rule 30, each row of pixels is derived
from the one above it. No shortcut is known for computing all bit values of
any column and row without having to run the system, despite the extreme
simplicity of the fully deterministic rule that generates it (icon at the top).

3

Irreducibility measures

There are several forms of irreducibility in computing systems, ranging from
undecidability to intractability to nonlinearity. The principle of computational
3

arXiv:1210.4809v1 [math.LO] 17 Oct 2012

On provability logics with linearly ordered
modalities
Lev D. Beklemishev∗, David Fernández-Duque†, Joost J. Joosten‡
September 27, 2018

Abstract
We introduce the logics GLPΛ , a generalization of Japaridze’s polymodal provability logic GLPω where Λ is any linearly ordered set representing a hierarchy of provability operators of increasing strength.
We shall provide a reduction of these logics to GLPω yielding among
other things a finitary proof of the normal form theorem for the variablefree fragment of GLPΛ and the decidability of GLPΛ for recursive orderings Λ. Further, we give a restricted axiomatization of the variable-free
fragment of GLPΛ .

1

Introduction

The provability logic GLPΛ with transfinitely many modalities hαi, for all
ordinals α < Λ, generalizes the well-known provability logic GLP denoted
GLPω in this paper [21, 9]. The logic GLPω has been used to carry out
a proof-theoretic analysis of Peano Arithmetic and related theories using
the approach of provability algebras initiated in [3]. A natural next class
of theories to analyze with this new approach are predicative theories such
as the second order theories of iterated arithmetical comprehension and
ATR0 . The first necessary step towards analyzing predicative theories with
provability algebras was made in [4] where logics GLPΛ , for an arbitrary
ordinal Λ, were introduced and it was shown that the variable-free fragments
of these logics yield a natural ordinal notation system up to the ordinal Γ0 .
∗
V.A. Steklov Mathematical Institute, RAS; Moscow M.V. Lomonosov State University; NRU Higher School of Economics; bekl@mi.ras.ru
†
Group for Logic, Language and Computation, University of Seville, dfduque@us.es
‡
Dept.
Lògica, Història i Filosofia de la Ciència, Universitat de Barcelona,
jjoosten@ub.edu

1

Assuming an ordinal Λ to be represented, ordinals of a possibly larger
class can be denoted by modal formulas (called words or worms) of the form
hα1 ihα2 i . . . hαn i⊤,
where αi < Λ, identified modulo provable equivalence in GLPΛ . The ordering
between two words A and B is naturally defined by
A <0 B ⇐⇒ GLPΛ ⊢ B → h0iA.
It was shown that this ordering is a well-ordering, and basic formulas for
the computation of the order types of its initial segments in terms of Veblen
ordinal functions were found in [4].
Since then, the logics GLPΛ and their ordinal notation systems have
been studied in much more detail (see [16, 13, 14]). Most importantly,
suitable Kripke models for the variable-free fragment of GLPΛ generalizing
the so-called Ignatiev model for GLPω [20] have been developed. Also, the
completeness of GLPΛ w.r.t. topological semantics has been proved [1, 12].
Some of these papers used the normal form results from [4].
Sections 4 and 5 of the present paper is in many respects a ‘recasting’ of
the part of [4] devoted to the normal forms for the variable-free fragment of
GLPΛ and to its axiomatizations. The main reason to have such a recasting
is that the exposition in [4] was at some places overly sketchy, to the extent
that some parts of the arguments were only hinted at. The main such omission was the proof of the fact that the ordering <0 on words was irreflexive,
or equivalently the fact that any individual word was consistent with GLPΛ .
Modulo this claim, the rest of the arguments in the paper were purely syntactical or dealt with ordinal computations. For this consistency result one
would naturally use some kind of semantics, which were not available at the
time for Λ > ω (but see [13]).
Another reason for having a recast of parts of [4] is that the authors
of [13] needed certain results –in particular, Corollaries 5.11 and 5.12 of
the current paper – that follow from the line of reasoning presented in [4].
However, a proof of these corollaries could not be given without revisiting
and sharpening various results from [4].
Moreover, it was remarked in [4] that the irreflexivity of <0 follows,
for example, from any arithmetically sound interpretation of GLPΛ w.r.t. a
sequence of strong provability predicates. Indeed, the existence of such interpretations was obvious at least for constructive ordinals Λ. On the other
hand, a proof appealing to such an interpretation is necessarily based on the
assumption of soundness of a fairly strong extension of Peano Arithmetic and
2

thus cannot be formalized in Peano Arithmetic itself. For proof-theoretic
applications we would like to have an ordering representation whose elementary properties such as irreflexivity are provable by finitary means (e.g.,
in Primitive Recursive Arithmetic). Alternative proofs based on the use of
Ignatiev-like models or topological models for GLPΛ suffer from the same
drawback.
In this paper we remedy this situation and provide a different purely
modal finitary proof of irreflexivity based on a reduction of GLPΛ to GLPω ,
for which such a finitary proof is known [2]. We also prove the conservativity
of GLPΛ over any of its restrictions to a subset of modalities. This reduction
uses the methods of [6].
The exposition of the normal form theorem for variable-free formulas in
GLPΛ in this paper is also slightly different from the one in [3, 4]. Namely,
the normal forms are defined in a ‘positive’ way, which helps, in particular, to eliminate the assumption of irreflexivity at some places where it is
not necessary. Finally, we provide a more restricted axiomatization of the
variable-free fragment of GLPΛ than the one in [4].
An additional novelty of this paper is that the results can be stated and
proved in a more general context of logics with linearly ordered sets of modalities. Thus, from the outset we introduce and work with a generalization of
GLPΛ to the case when Λ is an arbitrary, not necessarily well-founded, linear
ordering. So far, proof-theoretic interpretations of such logics have not been
investigated; however it seems likely that they can appear, for example, in
the study of progressions of theories defined along recursive linear orderings
without infinite hyperarithmetical descending sequences (see, e.g., [11]).

2

The logic GLPΛ and its fragments

In this section we shall introduce the formal systems that we will study
throughout the paper. Our logics depend on a parameter, usually denoted
Λ, which is a linear order of the form h|Λ|, <i. They then contain a modality
[α] for each α ∈ |Λ|. In analogy to the set-theoretic treatment of ordinals,
we will identify Λ with an upper bound for its elements and often write
α < Λ instead of α ∈ |Λ|; elements of |Λ| will sometimes be called modals.
Note, however, that unlike previous studies of GLPΛ , we allow for Λ to be
an arbitrary linear order.
We will also introduce some important fragments of GLPΛ . These fragments are easier to work with from a technical point of view, yet they already
contain much of the crucial information about the full logic, as we shall see.

3

arXiv:1212.2395v1 [math.LO] 11 Dec 2012

Π01-ordinal analysis beyond first-order arithmetic
Joost J. Joosten
November 27, 2024
Abstract
In this paper we give an overview of an essential part of a Π01 ordinal
analysis of Peano Arithmetic (PA) as presented by Beklemishev ([3]). This
analysis is mainly performed within the polymodal provability logic GLPω .
We reflect on ways of extending this analysis beyond PA. A main
difficulty in this is to find proper generalizations of the so-called Reduction Property. The Reduction Property relates reflection principles to
reflection rules.
In this paper we prove a result that simplifies the reflection rules.
Moreover, we see that for an ordinal analysis the full Reduction Property
is not needed. This latter observation is also seen to open up ways for
applications of ordinal analysis relative to some strong base theory.

1

Introduction

Primitive Recursive Arithmetic (PRA) is a rather weak formal theory about the
natural numbers which is among various philosophers, logicians and mathematicians held to be a good candidate for the concept of finitism (see e.g., [15]). The
concept of finitism tries to capture those mathematical truths and that part of
mathematical reasoning which is true beyond doubt and which not uses strong
assumptions on infinite mathematical entities.
Gentzen showed in his seminal paper from 1936 ([11]) that PRA together
with some clearly non-finitist notion of transfinite induction for easy formulas
along a rather small ordinal could prove the consistency of Peano Arithmetic
(PA).
This result can be seen as a partial realization of Hilbert’s programme where
finitist theories are to prove the consistency of strong mathematical theories. Of
course, since Gödel’s incompleteness results we know that this program is not
viable but Gentzen’s consistency proof seems to clearly isolate the non-finitist
part needed for such a consistency proof.
Since Gentzen’s consistency proof, the scientific community has tried to calibrate the proof-strength of various theories other than PA. The amount of
transfinite induction needed in these consistency proofs is referred to as the

1

proof-theoretic ordinal of a theory. There are various ways of defining and computing these ordinals and for most natural theories these methods all yield the
same ordinals.
Among these methods the more novel one was introduced by Beklemishev [3]
and is based on modal provability logics. The corresponding ordinals are referred
to as the Π01 ordinals. In this paper we shall sketch the method for computing
these Π01 ordinals. So far, the method has only been applied successfully to
theories as PA and its kin. In this paper we reflect on ways of extending this
analysis beyond PA.
A main difficulty in this is to find proper generalizations of the so-called
Reduction Property. The Reduction Property relates reflection principles to
reflection rules. In this paper we prove a result that simplifies the reflection rules.
Moreover, we see that for an ordinal analysis the full Reduction Property is not
needed. This latter observation is also seen to open up ways for applications of
ordinal analysis relative to some strong base theory.
Before we can start looking into the ordinal analysis, we must first introduce
some basic knowledge concerning arithmetic and provability logics.

2

Prerequisites

All results in this section are given without proofs. For further background the
reader is referred to standard textbooks like [6] or [12].

2.1

Arithmetic

By the language of arithmetic we understand in this paper the language based
on the symbols {0, S, +, ×, exp, ≤, =} where exp denotes the function x 7→ 2x .
Formulas of arithmetic are stratified in complexity classes as usual. Thus,
∆00 formulas are first-order formulas where all quantifiers refer to numbers and
are bounded by some term t as in ∀ x≤t where of course x ∈
/ t.
We define Σ00 := Π00 := ∆00 . If ϕ(~x, ~y ) ∈ Σ0n , then ∀~x ϕ(~x, ~y ) ∈ Π0n+1 and
likewise, if ϕ(~x, ~y) ∈ Π0n , then ∃~x ϕ(~x, ~y) ∈ Σ0n+1 .
Similarly we define the hierarchies Πnm where now the number of nth-order
quantifiers is counted although in this paper we shall at most need second order
quantifiers.
By EA we denote the arithmetic theory of Elementary Arithmetic. This
theory is formulated in the language of arithmetic. Apart from the defining
axioms for the symbols in the language, EA has an induction axiom Iϕ for each
∆00 formula ϕ(~x, y) (that may contain exp):
Iϕ (~x) : ϕ(~x, 0) ∧ ∀ y (ϕ(~x, y) → ϕ(~x, y + 1)) → ∀yϕ(~x, y).
By EA+ we denote EA plus the axiom that states that super-exponentiation
–the function that maps x to the x times iteration of exp– is a total function.

2

By IΣn we denote the theory that is as EA except that it now has induction
axioms Iϕ for all formulas ϕ(~x) ∈ Σ0n . The theory PA is the union of all the
IΣn in that it has induction axioms for all arithmetic formulas.

2.2

Transfinite induction

Greek letters will often denote ordinals and as usual we denote by ε0 the supreω
mum of {ω, ω ω , ω ω , . . .}. Apart from considering induction along the natural
numbers we shall consider induction along transfinite orderings too. If hΓ, ≺i
is a natural arithmetical representation in EA of some ordinal we denote by
TI[X, Γ] the collection of transfinite induction axioms for all formulas in X:

∀y ∀ y ′ ≺y ϕ(~x, y ′ ) → ϕ(~x, y) → ∀y ϕ(~x, y)
with ϕ(~x, y) ∈ X.

2.3

Formalized metamathematics

Throughout this paper we shall use representations in arithmetic of various
metamathematical notions. In particular we fix some Gödel numbering to represent formulas and other syntactical objects in arithmetic.
Moreover, we assume that we can represent r.e. theories in a suitable way
so that we can speak of “the formula ϕ is provable in the theory T ” whose
formalization we shall denote by T ϕ. Dually, we shall use the notion of “the
formula ϕ is consistent with the theory T ” which is denoted by ConT (ϕ) or ♦T ϕ.
If we write T ϕ(ẋ) we denote by that a formula whose free variable is x,
and so that provably for every x, the formula T ϕ(ẋ) is equivalent to T ϕ(x).
Here x denotes the numeral of x, that is,
x times

z }| {
x = S . . . S 0.

3

Provability logics

The logics GLPΛ provide provability logics for a series of provability predicates/modalities [α] of increasing strength.
Definition 3.1. Let Λ be an ordinal. By GLPΛ we denote the poly-modal propositional logic that has for each α < Λ a modality [α] (that syntactically binds as
the negation symbol). The axioms of GLP are all propositional logical tautologies
in this signature together with instantiations of the following schemes:
[α](A → B) → ([α]A → [α]B)
[α]([α]A → A) → [α]A
[α]A → [β]A
hαiA → [β]hαiA

∀α < Λ;
∀α < Λ;
∀α ≤ β < Λ;
∀α < β < Λ.

As always we have that hαiA := ¬[α]¬A. The rules are Modus Ponens and a
A
Necessitation rule for each modality below Γ, that is, [α]A
.
3

